---
layout: post
title: 2. Configuring the build
subtitle: Common SBT-Android features
---

This section will explain the SBT-Android build process into a little more
detail.

# Starting SBT

SBT is the build tool our plugin runs on. It is used by the Scala community and
can be used to replace tools like Maven or Gradle.

People generally use SBT through its command prompt, started by running `sbt`
in a terminal. In there, you can inspect the build settings and run tasks and
commands.

Before starting, SBT first checks for either `build.sbt` (which is the simplest
way of starting a SBT project), or a `project/build.scala` file (which can be
used to configure more complex builds).

_**Note:** Remember that we have already created a
`build.sbt` file in section 1!_

The build files contain settings, which generally look like this :

```scala
useProguard := false
```

`useProguard` is a _setting key_, and `:= false` assigns the value `false` to
that key.

Instead of changing `build.sbt`, you can set a key on the fly while running SBT
by using the `set` command, like :

```scala
set useProguard := false
```

SBT-Android is a SBT _plugin_, and as such is set up in `project/plugins.sbt`
by adding a line that looks like this :

```scala
addSbtPlugin("org.scala-sbt" % "sbt-android" % "0.7-SNAPSHOT")
```

_**Note:** Plugins are essentially additional classes loaded by SBT on the
project classpath. Here we use a Maven-style reference : `org.scala-sbt` is the
artifact organization, `sbt-android` is the artifact name, and
`0.7-SNAPSHOT` is the version._

# Using SBT

Within the SBT prompt, you can :

  * Run a task, such as the `start` task we saw earlier, or `apk`, which will
    generate an APK package.

  * Show the values returned by settings and tasks. For example, running `show
    use-proguard` will show `true` or `false`, depending on whether Proguard is
    enabled for your build.

  * Change settings and tasks on the fly. You could just type `set useProguard
    := false` to disable Proguard for a particular session.

SBT will place all the build artifacts and temporary files somewhere under the
`target/` directory.

SBT can watch your sources for changes and run a command each time something
happens if you use the `~` (tilda) operator before running a task, such as
`~compile`.

# General build process

The SBT-Android build process is very similar to a standard Android build. Here
are the most important parts :

  1. It first runs _source generators_ such as the `aapt` and `aidl` commands to parse resources and
     generate, among others, `R.java` files, and extracts ApkLib dependencies.

     Generated sources end up in `target/scala-2.10/src_managed`, while ApkLib
     dependencies have their own managed folder in
     `target/scala-2.10/apklib_managed`.

     You can show every managed source by typing `show managed-sources` in SBT.

  2. It compiles both unmanaged sources (the ones you wrote yourself) and
     managed sources from the previous step.

     The compilation step can be started by typing `compile` in SBT.

  3. It optionally runs Proguard to remove unneeded classes. Note that
     _Proguard is necessary when using the Scala library_.

     You can run this step with the `proguard` task in SBT.

  4. It runs the `dex` command to transform JVM class files into Dalvik bytecode
     that can run on Android.

     You can run this step with the `dx` task.

  5. Finally, it creates an APK with everything above. This is what you get
     when you run the `apk` command.

# Inspecting the app classpath

# Controlling Proguard

As we've seen before, Proguard can be turned on/off with the `useProguard` key.

Here are a few additional Proguard options :

  * **`proguardOptions`**: Additional Proguard options. The plugin
    automatically generates options for your main classes, but
    you may need it if you use additional libraries. Example :

    ```scala
    proguardOptions += "-keep class org.scaloid.** { *; }"
    ```

    _**Note:** The `+=` operator adds an option to a list setting key._

  * **`proguardOutputPath`**: The output path to the JAR file generated by
    Proguard.

# Using libraries and dependencies

Library dependencies can be added to the project in a standard SBT fashion :

```scala
libraryDependencies += "org.scaloid" %% "scaloid" % "2.0-16-SNAPSHOT"
```

This is, as we've seen with the SBT-Android plugin, a Maven-style dependency,
including organisation, artifact name and version.

If you want to add dependencies at compile-time only, but not include them in
the APK, use the `provided` scope :

```scala
libraryDependencies += "org.scaloid" %% "scaloid" % "2.0-16-SNAPSHOT" % "provided"
```

Of course, they need to be available on the device at runtime.

_**Note:** For those unfamiliar with it, I recommend looking at
[MVNRepository](http://mvnrepository.com). Package maintainers usually include
the right information on their project page._
